Those to whom existence comes about by chance and automatic action and is held together by material forces have drifted far from God and from the concept of unity; we are not here addressing them but only such as accept another nature than body and have some conception of soul.


Soul must be sounded to the depths, understood as an emanation from Intellectual-Principle and as holding its value by a Reason-Principle thence infused. Next this Intellect must be apprehended, an Intellect other than the reasoning faculty known as the rational principle; with reasoning we are already in the region of separation and movement: our sciences are Reason-Principles lodged in soul or mind, having manifestly acquired their character by the presence in the soul of Intellectual-Principle, source of all knowing.


Thus we come to see Intellectual-Principle almost as an object of sense: the Intellectual Kosmos is perceptible as standing above soul, father to soul: we know Intellectual-Principle as the motionless, not subject to change, containing, we must think, all things; a multiple but at once indivisible and comporting difference. It is not discriminate as are the Reason-Principles, which can in fact be known one by one: yet its content is not a confusion; every item stands forth distinctly, just as in a science the entire content holds as an indivisible and yet each item is a self-standing verity.


Now a plurality thus concentrated like the Intellectual Kosmos is close upon The First — and reason certifies its existence as surely as that of soul — yet, though of higher sovereignty than soul, it is not The First since it is not a unity, not simplex as unity, principle over all multiplicity, must be.


Before it there is That which must transcend the noblest of the things of Being: there must be a prior to this Principle which aiming towards unity is yet not unity but a thing in unity’s likeness. From this highest it is not sundered; it too is self-present: so close to the unity, it cannot be articulated: and yet it is a principle which in some measure has dared secession.


That awesome Prior, The Unity, is not a being, for so its unity would be vested in something else: strictly no name is apt to it, but since name it we must there is a certain rough fitness in designating it as unity with the understanding that it is not the unity of some other thing.


Thus it eludes our knowledge, so that the nearer approach to it is through its offspring, Being: we know it as cause of existence to Intellectual-Principle, as fount of all that is best, as the efficacy which, self-perduring and undiminishing, generates all beings and is not to be counted among these its derivatives, to all of which it must be prior.


This we can but name The Unity, indicating it to each other by a designation that points to the concept of its partlessness while we are in reality striving to bring our own minds to unity. We are not to think of such unity and partlessness as belong to point or monad; the veritable unity is the source of all such quantity which could not exist unless first there existed Being and Being’s Prior: we are not, then, to think in the order of point and monad but to use these — in their rejection of magnitude and partition — as symbols for the higher concept.


[6] Πῶς οὖν λέγομεν ἕν, καὶ πῶς τῆι νοήσει ἐφαρμοστέον; Ἢ πλεόνως τιθέμενον ἓν ἢ ὡς μονὰς καὶ σημεῖον ἑνί- ζεται. Ἐνταῦθα μὲν γὰρ μέγεθος ἡ ψυχὴ ἀφελοῦσα καὶ ἀριθμοῦ πλῆθος καταλήγει εἰς τὸ σμικρότατον καὶ ἐπερείδεταί τινι ἀμερεῖ μέν, ἀλλὰ ὃ ἦν ἐν μεριστῶι καὶ ὅ ἐστιν ἐν ἄλλωι· τὸ δὲ οὔτε ἐν ἄλλωι οὔτε ἐν μεριστῶι οὔτε οὕτως ἀμερές, ὡς τὸ μικρότατον· μέγιστον γὰρ ἁπάντων οὐ μεγέθει, ἀλλὰ δυνάμει, ὥστε καὶ τὸ ἀμέγεθες δυνάμει· ἐπεὶ καὶ τὰ μετ᾽ αὐτὸ ὄντα ταῖς δυνάμεσιν ἀμέριστα καὶ ἀμερῆ, οὐ τοῖς ὄγκοις. Ληπτέον δὲ καὶ ἄπειρον αὐτὸν οὐ τῶι ἀδιεξιτήτωι ἢ τοῦ μεγέθους ἢ τοῦ ἀριθμοῦ, ἀλλὰ τῶι ἀπεριλήπτωι τῆς δυνάμεως. Ὅταν γὰρ ἂν αὐτὸν νοήσηις οἷον ἢ νοῦν ἢ θεόν, πλέον ἐστί· καὶ αὖ ὅταν αὐτὸν ἑνίσηις τῆι διανοίαι, καὶ ἐνταῦθα πλέον ἐστὶν ἢ ὅσον ἂν αὐτὸν ἐφαντάσθης εἰς τὸ ἑνικώτερον τῆς σῆς νοήσεως εἶναι· ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ γάρ ἐστιν οὐδενὸς αὐτῶι συμβεβηκότος. Τῶι αὐτάρκει δ᾽ ἄν τις καὶ τὸ ἓν αὐτοῦ ἐνθυμηθείη. Δεῖ μὲν γὰρ ἱκανώτατον [ὂν] ἁπάντων καὶ αὐταρκέστατον, καὶ ἀνενδεέστατον εἶναι· πᾶν δὲ πολὺ καὶ μὴ ἓν ἐνδεές – μὴ ἓν ἐκ πολλῶν γενόμενον. Δεῖται οὖν αὐτοῦ ἡ οὐσία ἓν εἶναι. Τὸ δὲ οὐ δεῖται ἑαυτοῦ· αὐτὸ γάρ ἐστι. Καὶ μὴν πολλὰ ὂν τοσούτων δεῖται, ὅσα ἔστι, καὶ ἕκαστον τῶν ἐν αὐτῶι μετὰ τῶν ἄλλων ὂν καὶ οὐκ ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ, ἐνδεὲς τῶν ἄλλων ὑπάρχον, καὶ καθ᾽ ἓν καὶ κατὰ τὸ ὅλον τὸ τοιοῦτον ἐν- δεὲς παρέχεται. Εἴπερ οὖν δεῖ τι αὐταρκέστατον εἶναι, τὸ ἓν εἶναι δεῖ τοιοῦτον ὂν μόνον, οἷον μήτε πρὸς αὑτὸ μήτε πρὸς ἄλλο ἐνδεὲς εἶναι. Οὐ γάρ τι ζητεῖ, ἵνα ἦι, οὐδ᾽ ἵνα εὖ ἦι, οὐδὲ ἵνα ἐκεῖ ἱδρυθῆι. Τοῖς μὲν γὰρ ἄλλοις αἴτιον ὂν οὐ παρ᾽ ἄλλων ἔχει ὅ ἐστι, τό τε εὖ τί ἂν εἴη αὐτῶι ἔξω αὐτοῦ; Ὥστε οὐ κατὰ συμβεβηκὸς αὐτῶι τὸ εὖ· αὐτὸ γάρ ἐστι. Τόπος τε οὐδεὶς αὐτῶι· οὐ γὰρ δεῖται ἱδρύσεως ὥσπερ αὑτὸ φέρειν οὐ δυνάμενον, τό τε ἱδρυθησόμενον ἄψυχον καὶ ὄγκος πίπτων, ἐὰν μήπω ἱδρυθῆι. Ἵδρυται δὲ καὶ τὰ ἄλλα διὰ τοῦτον, δι᾽ ὃν ὑπέστη ἅμα καὶ ἔσχεν εἰς ὃν ἐτάχθη τόπον· ἐνδεὲς δὲ καὶ τὸ τόπον ζητοῦν. Ἀρχὴ δὲ οὐκ ἐνδεὲς τῶν μετ᾽ αὐτό· ἡ δ᾽ ἁπάντων ἀρχὴ ἀνενδεὲς ἁπάντων. Ὅ τι γὰρ ἐνδεές, ἐφιέμενον ἀρχῆς ἐνδεές· εἰ δὲ τὸ ἓν ἐνδεές του, ζητεῖ δηλονότι τὸ μὴ εἶναι ἕν· ὥστε ἐνδεὲς ἔσται τοῦ φθεροῦντος· πᾶν δὲ ὃ ἂν λέγηται ἐνδεές, τοῦ εὖ καὶ τοῦ σώιζοντός ἐστιν ἐνδεές. Ὥστε τῶι ἑνὶ οὐδὲν ἀγαθόν ἐστιν· οὐδὲ βούλησις τοίνυν οὐδενός· ἀλλ᾽ ἔστιν ὑπεράγαθον καὶ αὐτὸ οὐχ ἑαυτῶι, τοῖς δὲ ἄλλοις ἀγαθόν, εἴ τι αὐτοῦ δύναται μεταλαμβάνειν. Οὐδὲ νόησις, ἵνα μὴ ἑτερότης· οὐδὲ κίνησις· πρὸ γὰρ κινήσεως καὶ πρὸ νοήσεως. Τί γὰρ καὶ νοήσει; ἑαυτόν; Πρὸ νοήσεως τοίνυν ἀγνοῶν ἔσται, καὶ νοήσεως δεήσεται, ἵνα γνῶι ἑαυτὸν ὁ αὐτάρκης ἑαυτῶι. Οὐ τοίνυν, ὅτι μὴ γινώσκει μηδὲ νοεῖ ἑαυτόν, ἄγνοια περὶ αὐτὸν ἔσται· ἡ γὰρ ἄγνοια ἑτέρου ὄντος γίγνεται, ὅταν θάτερον ἀγνοῆι θάτερον· τὸ δὲ μόνον οὔτε γιγνώσκει, οὔτε τι ἔχει ὃ ἀγνοεῖ, ἓν δὲ ὂν συνὸν αὑτῶι οὐ δεῖται νοήσεως ἑαυτοῦ. Ἐπεὶ οὐδὲ τὸ συνεῖναι δεῖ προσάπτειν, ἵνα τηρῆις τὸ ἕν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ νοεῖν καὶ τὸ συνιέναι ἀφαιρεῖν καὶ ἑαυτοῦ νόησιν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων· οὐ γὰρ κατὰ τὸν νοοῦντα δεῖ τάττειν αὐτόν, ἀλλὰ μᾶλλον κατὰ τὴν νόησιν. Νόησις δὲ οὐ νοεῖ, ἀλλ᾽ αἰτία τοῦ νοεῖν ἄλλωι· τὸ δὲ αἴτιον οὐ ταὐτὸν τῶι αἰτιατῶι. Τὸ δὲ πάντων αἴτιον οὐδέν ἐστιν ἐκείνων. Οὐ τοίνυν οὐδὲ ἀγαθὸν λεκτέον τοῦτο, ὃ παρέχει, ἀλλὰ ἄλλως τἀγαθὸν ὑπὲρ τὰ ἄλλα ἀγαθά.
