The main part of the difficulty is that awareness of this Principle comes neither by knowing nor by the Intellection that discovers the Intellectual Beings but by a presence overpassing all knowledge. In knowing, soul or mind abandons its unity; it cannot remain a simplex: knowing is taking account of things; that accounting is multiple; the mind, thus plunging into number and multiplicity, departs from unity.


Our way then takes us beyond knowing; there may be no wandering from unity; knowing and knowable must all be left aside; every object of thought, even the highest, we must pass by, for all that is good is later than This and derives from This as from the sun all the light of the day.


“Not to be told; not to be written”: in our writing and telling we are but urging towards it: out of discussion we call to vision: to those desiring to see, we point the path; our teaching is of the road and the travelling; the seeing must be the very act of one that has made this choice.


There are those that have not attained to see. The soul has not come to know the splendour There; it has not felt and clutched to itself that love-passion of vision known to lover come to rest where he loves. Or struck perhaps by that authentic light, all the soul lit by the nearness gained, we have gone weighted from beneath; the vision is frustrate; we should go without burden and we go carrying that which can but keep us back; we are not yet made over into unity.


From none is that Principle absent and yet from all: present, it remains absent save to those fit to receive, disciplined into some accordance, able to touch it closely by their likeness and by that kindred power within themselves through which, remaining as it was when it came to them from the Supreme, they are enabled to see in so far as God may at all be seen.


Failure to attain may be due to such impediment or to lack of the guiding thought that establishes trust; impediment we must charge against ourselves and strive by entire renunciation to become emancipate; where there is distrust for lack of convincing reason, further considerations may be applied:


[5] Ὅστις οἴεται τὰ ὄντα τύχηι καὶ τῶι αὐτομάτωι διοι- κεῖσθαι καὶ σωματικαῖς συνέχεσθαι αἰτίαις, οὗτος πόρρω ἀπελήλαται καὶ θεοῦ καὶ ἐννοίας ἑνός, καὶ ὁ λόγος οὐ πρὸς τούτους, ἀλλὰ πρὸς τοὺς ἄλλην φύσιν παρὰ τὰ σώματα τιθεμένους καὶ ἀνιόντας ἐπὶ ψυχήν. Καὶ δὴ δεῖ τούτους φύσιν ψυχῆς κατανενοηκέναι τά τε ἄλλα καὶ ὡς παρὰ νοῦ ἐστι καὶ λόγου παρὰ τούτου κοιωνήσασα ἀρετὴν ἴσχει· μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα νοῦν λαβεῖν ἕτερον τοῦ λογιζομένου καὶ λογιστικοῦ καλουμένου, καὶ τοὺς λογισμοὺς ἤδη οἷον ἐν διαστάσει καὶ κινήσει, καὶ τὰς ἐπιστήμας λόγους ἐν ψυχῆι τὰς τοιαύτας ἐν φανερῶι ἤδη γεγονυίας τῶι ἐν τῆι ψυχῆι γεγονέναι τὸν νοῦν τῶν ἐπιστημῶν αἴτιον. Καὶ νοῦν ἰδόντα οἷον αἰσθητὸν τῶι ἀντιληπτὸν εἶναι ἐπαναβεβηκότα τῆι ψυχῆι καὶ πατέρα αὐτῆς ὄντα κόσμον νοητόν, νοῦν ἥσυχον καὶ ἀτρεμῆ κίνησιν φατέον πάντα ἔχοντα ἐν αὐτῶι καὶ πάντα ὄντα, πλῆθος ἀδιάκριτον καὶ αὖ διακεκριμένον. Οὔτε γὰρ διακέκριται ὡς οἱ λόγοι οἱ ἤδη καθ᾽ ἓν νοούμενοι, οὔτε συγκέχυται τὰ ἐν αὐτῶι· πρόεισι γὰρ ἕκαστον χωρίς· οἷον καὶ ἐν ταῖς ἐπιστήμαις πάντων ἐν ἀμερεῖ ὄντων ὅμως ἐστὶν ἕκαστον χωρὶς αὐτῶν. Τοῦτο οὖν τὸ ὁμοῦ πλῆθος, ὁ κόσμος ὁ νοητός, ἔστι μὲν ὃ πρὸς τῶι πρώτωι, καί φησιν αὐτὸ ὁ λόγος ἐξ ἀνάγκης εἶναι, εἴπερ τις καὶ ψυχὴν εἶναι, τοῦτο δὲ κυριώτερον ψυχῆς· οὐ μέντοι πρῶτον, ὅτι ἓν μηδὲ ἁπλοῦν· ἁπλοῦν δὲ τὸ ἓν καὶ ἡ πάντων ἀρχή. Τὸ δὴ πρὸ τοῦ ἐν τοῖς οὖσι τιμιωτάτου, εἴπερ δεῖ τι πρὸ νοῦ εἶναι ἓν μὲν εἶναι βουλομένου, οὐκ ὄντος δὲ ἕν, ἑνοειδοῦς δέ, ὅτι αὐτῶι μηδὲ ἐσκέδασται ὁ νοῦς, ἀλλὰ σύνεστιν ἑαυτῶι ὄντως οὐ διαρτήσας ἑαυτὸν τῶι πλησίον μετὰ τὸ ἓν εἶναι, ἀποστῆναι δέ πως τοῦ ἑνὸς τολμήσας – τὸ δὴ πρὸ τούτου θαῦμα τοῦ ἕν, ὃ μὴ ὄν ἐστιν, ἵνα μὴ καὶ ἐνταῦθα κατ᾽ ἄλλου τὸ ἕν, ὧι ὄνομα μὲν κατὰ ἀλήθειαν οὐδὲν προσῆκον, εἴπερ δὲ δεῖ ὀνομάσαι, κοινῶς ἂν λεχθὲν προσηκόντως ἕν, οὐχ ὡς ἄλλο, εἶτα ἕν, χαλεπὸν μὲν γνωσθῆναι διὰ τοῦτο, γιγνωσκόμενον δὲ μᾶλλον τῶι ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ γεννήματι, τῆι οὐσίαι – καὶ ἄγει εἰς οὐσίαν νοῦς – καὶ αὐτοῦ ἡ φύσις τοιαύτη, ὡς πηγὴν τῶν ἀρίστων εἶναι καὶ δύναμιν γεννῶσαν τὰ ὄντα μένουσαν ἐν ἑαυτῆι καὶ οὐκ ἐλαττουμένην οὐδὲ ἐν τοῖς γινομένοις ὑπ᾽ αὐτῆς οὖσαν. Ὅ τι καὶ πρὸ τούτων, ὀνομάζομεν ἓν ἐξ ἀνάγκης τῶι σημαίνειν ἀλλήλοις αὐτὴν τῶι ὀνόματι εἰς ἔννοιαν ἀμέριστον ἄγοντες καὶ τὴν ψυχὴν ἑνοῦν θέλοντες, οὐχ οὕτως ἓν λέγοντες καὶ ἀμερές, ὡς σημεῖον ἢ μονάδα λέγοντες· τὸ γὰρ οὕτως ἓν ποσοῦ ἀρχαί, ὃ οὐκ ἂν ὑπέστη μὴ προούσης οὐσίας καὶ τοῦ πρὸ οὐσίας· οὔκουν δεῖ ἐνταῦθα βάλλειν τὴν διάνοιαν· ἀλλὰ ταῦτα ὁμοίως αἰεὶ ἐκείνοις ἐν ἀναλογίαις τῶι ἁπλῶι καὶ τῆι φυγῆι τοῦ πλήθους καὶ τοῦ μερισμοῦ.
