If the mind reels before something thus alien to all we know, we must take our stand on the things of this realm and strive thence to see. But, in the looking, beware of throwing outward; this Principle does not lie away somewhere leaving the rest void; to those of power to reach, it is present; to the inapt, absent. In our daily affairs we cannot hold an object in mind if we have given ourselves elsewhere, occupied upon some other matter; that very thing must be before us to be truly the object of observation. So here also; preoccupied by the impress of something else, we are withheld under that pressure from becoming aware of The Unity; a mind gripped and fastened by some definite thing cannot take the print of the very contrary. As Matter, it is agreed, must be void of quality in order to accept the types of the universe, so and much more must the soul be kept formless if there is to be no infixed impediment to prevent it being brimmed and lit by the Primal Principle.


In sum, we must withdraw from all the extern, pointed wholly inwards; no leaning to the outer; the total of things ignored, first in their relation to us and later in the very idea; the self put out of mind in the contemplation of the Supreme; all the commerce so closely There that, if report were possible, one might become to others reporter of that communion.


Such converse, we may suppose, was that of Minos, thence known as the Familiar of Zeus; and in that memory he established the laws which report it, enlarged to that task by his vision There. Some, on the other hand, there will be to disdain such citizen service, choosing to remain in the higher: these will be those that have seen much.


God — we read — is outside of none, present unperceived to all; we break away from Him, or rather from ourselves; what we turn from we cannot reach; astray ourselves, we cannot go in search of another; a child distraught will not recognise its father; to find ourselves is to know our source.


[8] Εἴ τις οὖν ψυχὴ οἶδεν ἑαυτὴν τὸν ἄλλον χρόνον, καὶ οἶδεν ὅτι ἡ κίνησις αὐτῆς οὐκ εὐθεῖα, ἀλλ᾽ ἢ ὅταν κλάσιν λάβηι, ἡ δὲ κατὰ φύσιν κίνησις οἵα ἡ ἐν κύκλωι περί τι οὐκ ἔξω, ἀλλὰ περὶ κέντρον, τὸ δὲ κέντρον ἀφ᾽ οὗ ὁ κύκλος, κινήσεται περὶ τοῦτο, ἀφ᾽ οὗ ἐστι, καὶ τούτου ἀναρτήσεται συμφέρουσα ἑαυτὴν πρὸς τὸ αὐτό, πρὸς ὃ ἐχρῆν μὲν πάσας, φέρονται δὲ αἱ θεῶν ἀεί· πρὸς ὃ φερόμεναι θεοί εἰσι. Θεὸς γὰρ τὸ ἐκείνωι συνημμένον, τὸ δὲ πόρρω ἀφιστάμενον ἄνθρωπος ὁ πολὺς καὶ θηρίον. Τὸ οὖν τῆς ψυχῆς οἷον κέντρον τοῦτό ἐστι τὸ ζητούμενον; Ἢ ἄλλο τι δεῖ νομίσαι, εἰς ὃ πάντα οἷον κέντρα συμπίπτει; Καὶ ὅτι ἀναλογίαι τὸ κέντρον τοῦδε τοῦ κύκλου; Οὐδὲ γὰρ οὕτω κύκλος ἡ ψυχὴ ὡς τὸ σχῆμα, ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι ἐν αὐτῆι καὶ περὶ αὐτὴν ἡ ἀρχαία φύσις, καὶ ὅτι ἀπὸ τοιούτου, καὶ ἔτι μᾶλλον καὶ ὅτι χωρισθεῖσαι ὅλαι. Νῦν δέ, ἐπεὶ μέρος ἡμῶν κατέχεται ὑπὸ τοῦ σώματος, οἷον εἴ τις τοὺς πόδας ἔχοι ἐν ὕδατι, τῶι δ᾽ ἄλλωι σώματι ὑπερέχοι, τῶι δὴ μὴ βαπτισθέντι τῶι σώματι ὑπεράραντες, τούτωι συνάπτομεν κατὰ τὸ ἑαυτῶν κέντρον τῶι οἷον πάντων κέντρωι, καθάπερ τῶν μεγίστων κύκλων τὰ κέντρα τῶι τῆς σφαίρας τῆς περιεχούσης κέντρωι, ἀναπαυόμενοι. Εἰ μὲν οὖν σωματικοὶ ἦσαν, οὐ ψυχικοὶ κύκλοι, τοπικῶς ἂν τῶι κέντρωι συνῆπτον καί που κειμένου τοῦ κέντρου περὶ αὐτὸ ἂν ἦσαν· ἐπεὶ δὲ αὐταί τε αἱ ψυχαὶ νοηταί, ὑπὲρ νοῦν τε ἐκεῖνο, δυνάμεσιν ἄλλαις, ἧι πέφυκε τὸ νοοῦν πρὸς τὸ κατανοούμενον συνάπτειν, οἰητέον τὴν συναφὴν γίνεσθαι καὶ πλεόνως τὸ νοοῦν παρεῖναι ὁμοιότητι καὶ ταὐτότητι καὶ συνάπτειν τῶι συγγενεῖ οὐδενὸς διείργοντος. Σώμασι μὲν γὰρ σώματα κωλύεται κοινωνεῖν ἀλλήλοις, τὰ δὲ ἀσώματα σώμασιν οὐ διείργεται· οὐδ᾽ ἀφέστηκε τοίνυν ἀλλήλων τόπωι, ἑτερότητι δὲ καὶ διαφορᾶι· ὅταν οὖν ἡ ἑτερότης μὴ παρῆι, ἀλλήλοις τὰ μὴ ἕτερα πάρεστιν. Ἐκεῖνο μὲν οὖν μὴ ἔχον ἑτερότητα ἀεὶ πάρεστιν, ἡμεῖς δ᾽ ὅταν μὴ ἔχωμεν· κἀκεῖνο μὲν ἡμῶν οὐκ ἐφίεται, ὥστε περὶ ἡμᾶς εἶναι, ἡμεῖς δὲ ἐκείνου, ὥστε ἡμεῖς περὶ ἐκεῖνο. Καὶ ἀεὶ μὲν περὶ αὐτό, οὐκ ἀεὶ δὲ εἰς αὐτὸ βλέπομεν, ἀλλ᾽ οἷον χορὸς ἐξάιδων καίπερ ἔχων περὶ τὸν κορυφαῖον τραπείη ἂν εἰς τὸ ἔξω τῆς θέας, ὅταν δὲ ἐπιστρέψηι, ἄιδει τε καλῶς καὶ ὄντως περὶ αὐτὸν ἔχει, οὕτω καὶ ἡμεῖς ἀεὶ μὲν περὶ αὐτόν, καὶ ὅταν μή, λύσις ἡμῖν παντελὴς ἔσται καὶ οὐκέτι ἐσόμεθα· οὐκ ἀεὶ δὲ εἰς αὐτόν, ἀλλ᾽ ὅταν εἰς αὐτὸν ἴδωμεν, τότε ἡμῖν τέλος καὶ ἀνάπαυλα καὶ τὸ μὴ ἀπάιδειν χορεύουσιν ὄντως περὶ αὐτὸν χορείαν ἔνθεον.
