In what sense, then, do we assert this Unity, and how is it to be adjusted to our mental processes?


Its oneness must not be entitled to that of monad and point: for these the mind abstracts extension and numerical quantity and rests upon the very minutest possible, ending no doubt in the partless but still in something that began as a partible and is always lodged in something other than itself. The Unity was never in any other and never belonged to the partible: nor is its impartibility that of extreme minuteness; on the contrary it is great beyond anything, great not in extension but in power, sizeless by its very greatness as even its immediate sequents are impartible not in mass but in might. We must therefore take the Unity as infinite not in measureless extension or numerable quantity but in fathomless depths of power.


Think of The One as Mind or as God, you think too meanly; use all the resources of understanding to conceive this Unity and, again, it is more authentically one than God, even though you reach for God’s unity beyond the unity the most perfect you can conceive. For This is utterly a self-existent, with no concomitant whatever. This self-sufficing is the essence of its unity. Something there must be supremely adequate, autonomous, all-transcending, most utterly without need.


Any manifold, anything beneath The Unity, is dependent; combined from various constituents, its essential nature goes in need of unity; but unity cannot need itself; it stands unity accomplished. Again, a manifold depends upon all its factors; and furthermore each of those factors in turn — as necessarily inbound with the rest and not self-standing — sets up a similar need both to its associates and to the total so constituted.


The sovranly self-sufficing principle will be Unity-Absolute, for only in this Unity is there a nature above all need, whether within itself or in regard to the rest of things. Unity seeks nothing towards its being or its well-being or its safehold upon existence; cause to all, how can it acquire its character outside of itself or know any good outside? The good of its being can be no borrowing: This is The Good. Nor has it station; it needs no standing ground as if inadequate to its own sustaining; what calls for such underpropping is the soulless, some material mass that must be based or fall. This is base to all, cause of universal existence and of ordered station. All that demands place is in need; a First cannot go in need of its sequents: all need is effort towards a first principle; the First, principle to all, must be utterly without need. If the Unity be seeking, it must inevitably be seeking to be something other than itself; it is seeking its own destroyer. Whatever may be said to be in need of a good is needing a preserver; nothing can be a good to The Unity, therefore.


Neither can it have will to anything; it is a Beyond-Good, not even to itself a good but to such beings only as may be of quality to have part with it. Nor has it Intellection; that would comport diversity: nor Movement; it is prior to Movement as to Intellection.


To what could its Intellection be directed? To itself? But that would imply a previous ignorance; it would be dependent upon that Intellection in order to knowledge of itself; but it is the self-sufficing. Yet this absence of self-knowing does not comport ignorance; ignorance is of something outside — a knower ignorant of a knowable — but in the Solitary there is neither knowing nor anything unknown. Unity, self-present, it has no need of self-intellection: indeed this “self-presence” were better left out, the more surely to preserve the unity; we must eliminate all knowing and all association, all intellection whether internal or external. It is not to be though of as having but as being Intellection; Intellection does not itself perform the intellective act but is the cause of the act in something else, and cause is not to be identified with caused: most assuredly the cause of all is not a thing within that all.


This Principle is not, therefore, to be identified with the good of which it is the source; it is good in the unique mode of being The Good above all that is good.


[7] Εἰ δ᾽ ὅτι μηδὲν τούτων ἐστίν, ἀοριστεῖς τῆι γνώμηι, στῆσον σαυτὸν εἰς ταῦτα, καὶ ἀπὸ τούτων θεῶ· θεῶ δὲ μὴ ἔξω ῥίπτων τὴν διάνοιαν. Οὐ γὰρ κεῖταί που ἐρημῶσαν αὐτοῦ τὰ ἄλλα, ἀλλ᾽ ἔστι τῶι δυναμένωι θίγειν ἐκεῖ παρόν, τῶι δ᾽ ἀδυνατοῦντι οὐ πάρεστιν. Ὥσπερ δὲ ἐπὶ τῶν ἄλλων οὐκ ἔστι τι νοεῖν ἄλλο νοοῦντα καὶ πρὸς ἄλλωι ὄντα, ἀλλὰ δεῖ μηδὲν προσάπτειν τῶι νοουμένωι, ἵν᾽ ἦι αὐτὸ τὸ νοούμενον, οὕτω δεῖ καὶ ἐνταῦθα εἰδέναι, ὡς οὐκ ἔστιν ἄλλου ἔχοντα ἐν τῆι ψυχῆι τύπον ἐκεῖνο νοῆσαι ἐνεργοῦντος τοῦ τύπου, οὐδ᾽ αὖ ἄλλοις κατειλημμένην τὴν ψυχὴν καὶ κατεχομένην τυπωθῆναι τῶι τοῦ ἐναντίου τύπωι, ἀλλ᾽ ὥσπερ περὶ τῆς ὕλης λέγεται, ὡς ἄρα ἄποιον εἶναι δεῖ πάντων, εἰ μέλλει δέχεσθαι τοὺς πάντων τύπους, οὕτω καὶ πολὺ μᾶλλον ἀνείδεον τὴν ψυχὴν γίνεσθαι, εἰ μέλλει μηδὲν ἐμπόδιον ἐγκαθήμενον ἔσεσθαι πρὸς πλήρωσιν καὶ ἔλλαμψιν αὐτῆι τῆς φύσεως τῆς πρώτης. Εἰ δὲ τοῦτο, πάντων τῶν ἔξω ἀφεμένην δεῖ ἐπιστραφῆναι πρὸς τὸ εἴσω πάντη, μὴ πρός τι τῶν ἔξω κεκλίσθαι, ἀλλὰ ἀγνοήσαντα τὰ πάντα καὶ πρὸ τοῦ μὲν τῆι διαθέσει, τότε δὲ καὶ τοῖς εἴδεσιν, ἀγνοήσαντα δὲ καὶ αὑτὸν ἐν τῆι θέαι ἐκείνου γενέσθαι, κἀκείνωι συγγενόμενον καὶ ἱκανῶς οἷον ὁμιλήσαντα ἥκειν ἀγγέλλοντα, εἰ δύναιτο, καὶ ἄλλωι τὴν ἐκεῖ συνουσίαν· οἵαν ἴσως καὶ Μίνως ποιούμενος ὀαριστὴς τοῦ Διὸς ἐφημίσθη εἶναι, ἧς μεμνημένος εἴδωλα αὐτῆς τοὺς νόμους ἐτίθει τῆι τοῦ θείου ἐπαφῆι εἰς νόμων πληρούμενος θέσιν. Ἢ καὶ τὰ πολιτικὰ οὐκ ἄξια αὐτοῦ νομίσας ἀεὶ ἐθέλει μένειν ἄνω, ὅπερ καὶ τῶι πολὺ ἰδόντι γένοιτο ἂν πάθημα. Οὐδενός φησίν ἐστιν ἔξω, ἀλλὰ πᾶσι σύνεστιν οὐκ εἰδόσι. Φεύγουσι γὰρ αὐτοὶ αὐτοῦ ἔξω, μᾶλλον δὲ αὑτῶν ἔξω. Οὐ δύνανται οὖν ἑλεῖν ὃν πεφεύγασιν, οὐδ᾽ αὑτοὺς ἀπολωλεκότες ἄλλον ζητεῖν, οὐδέ γε παῖς αὑτοῦ ἔξω ἐν μανίαι γεγενημένος εἰδήσει τὸν πατέρα· ὁ δὲ μαθὼν ἑαυτὸν εἰδήσει καὶ ὁπόθεν.
