It may be suggested that, while in the unities of the partial order the essence and the unity are distinct, yet in collective existence, in Real Being, they are identical, so that when we have grasped Being we hold unity; Real Being would coincide with Unity. Thus, taking the Intellectual-Principle as Essential Being, that principle and the Unity Absolute would be at once Primal Being and Pure Unity, purveying, accordingly, to the rest of things something of Being and something, in proportion, of the unity which is itself.


There is nothing with which the unity would be more plausibly identified than with Being; either it is Being as a given man is man or it will correspond to the Number which rules in the realm of the particular; it will be a number applying to a certain unique thing as the number two applies to others.


Now if Number is a thing among things, then clearly so this unity must be; we would have to discover what thing of things it is. If Number is not a thing but an operation of the mind moving out to reckon, then the unity will not be a thing.


We found that anything losing unity loses its being; we are therefore obliged to enquire whether the unity in particulars is identical with the being, and unity absolute identical with collective being.


Now the being of the particular is a manifold; unity cannot be a manifold; there must therefore be a distinction between Being and Unity. Thus a man is at once a reasoning living being and a total of parts; his variety is held together by his unity; man therefore and unity are different — man a thing of parts against unity partless. Much more must Collective Being, as container of all existence, be a manifold and therefore distinct from the unity in which it is but participant.


Again, Collective Being contains life and intelligence — it is no dead thing — and so, once more, is a manifold.


If Being is identical with Intellectual-Principle, even at that it is a manifold; all the more so when count is taken of the Ideal Forms in it; for the Idea, particular or collective, is, after all, a numerable agglomeration whose unity is that of a kosmos.


Above all, unity is The First: but Intellectual-Principle, Ideas and Being, cannot be so; for any member of the realm of Forms is an aggregation, a compound, and therefore — since components must precede their compound — is a later.


Other considerations also go to show that the Intellectual-Principle cannot be the First. Intellect must be above the Intellectual Act: at least in its higher phase, that not concerned with the outer universe, it must be intent upon its Prior; its introversion is a conversion upon the Principle.


Considered as at once Thinker and Object of its Thought, it is dual, not simplex, not The Unity: considered as looking beyond itself, it must look to a better, to a prior: looking simultaneously upon itself and upon its Transcendent, it is, once more, not a First.


There is no other way of stating Intellectual-Principle than as that which, holding itself in the presence of The Good and First and looking towards That, is self-present also, self-knowing and Knowing itself as All-Being: thus manifold, it is far from being The Unity.


In sum: The Unity cannot be the total of beings, for so its oneness is annulled; it cannot be the Intellectual-Principle, for so it would be that total which the Intellectual-Principle is; nor is it Being, for Being is the manifold of things.


[3] Τί ἂν οὖν εἴη τὸ ἓν καὶ τίνα φύσιν ἔχον; Ἢ οὐδὲν θαυμαστὸν μὴ ῥάιδιον εἰπεῖν εἶναι, ὅπου μηδὲ τὸ ὂν ῥάιδιον μηδὲ τὸ εἶδος· ἀλλ᾽ ἔστιν ἡμῖν γνῶσις εἴδεσιν ἐπερειδομένη. Ὅσωι δ᾽ ἂν εἰς ἀνείδεον ἡ ψυχὴ ἴηι, ἐξαδυνατοῦσα περιλαβεῖν τῶι μὴ ὁρίζεσθαι καὶ οἷον τυποῦσθαι ὑπὸ ποικίλου τοῦ τυποῦντος ἐξολισθάνει καὶ φοβεῖται, μὴ οὐδὲν ἔχηι. Διὸ κάμνει ἐν τοῖς τοιούτοις καὶ ἀσμένη καταβαίνει πολλάκις ἀποπίπτουσα ἀπὸ πάντων, μέχρις ἂν εἰς αἰσθητὸν ἥκηι ἐν στερεῶι ὥσπερ ἀναπαυομένη· οἷον καὶ ἡ ὄψις κάμνουσα ἐν τοῖς μικροῖς τοῖς μεγάλοις ἀσμένως περιπίπτει. Καθ᾽ ἑαυτὴν δὲ ἡ ψυχὴ ὅταν ἰδεῖν ἐθέληι, μόνον ὁρῶσα τῶι συνεῖναι καὶ ἓν οὖσα τῶι ἓν εἶναι αὐτῶι οὐκ οἴεταί πω ἔχειν ὃ ζητεῖ, ὅτι τοῦ νοουμένου μὴ ἕτερόν ἐστιν. Ὅμως δὴ χρὴ οὕτως ποιεῖν τὸν μέλλοντα περὶ τὸ ἓν φιλοσοφήσειν. Ἐπεὶ τοίνυν ἕν ἐστιν ὃ ζητοῦμεν, καὶ τὴν ἀρχὴν τῶν πάντων ἐπισκοποῦμεν, τἀγαθὸν καὶ τὸ πρῶτον, οὔτε πόρρω δεῖ γενέσθαι τῶν περὶ τὰ πρῶτα εἰς τὰ ἔσχατα τῶν πάντων πεσόντα, ἀλλ᾽ ἱέμενον εἰς τὰ πρῶτα ἐπαναγαγεῖν ἑαυτὸν ἀπὸ τῶν αἰσθητῶν ἐσχάτων ὄντων, κακίας τε πάσης ἀπηλλαγμένον εἶναι ἅτε πρὸς τὸ ἀγαθὸν σπεύδοντα γενέσθαι, ἐπί τε τὴν ἐν ἑαυτῶι ἀρχὴν ἀναβεβηκέναι καὶ ἓν ἐκ πολλῶν γενέσθαι ἀρχῆς καὶ ἑνὸς θεατὴν ἐσόμενον. Νοῦν τοίνυν χρὴ γενόμενον καὶ τὴν ψυχὴν τὴν αὑτοῦ νῶι πιστεύσαντα καὶ ὑφιδρύσαντα, ἵν᾽ ἃ ὁρᾶι ἐκεῖνος ἐγρηγορυῖα δέχοιτο, τούτωι θεᾶσθαι τὸ ἓν οὐ προστιθέντα αἴσθησιν οὐδεμίαν οὐδέ τι παρ᾽ αὐτῆς εἰς ἐκεῖνον δεχόμενον, ἀλλὰ καθαρῶι τῶι νῶι τὸ καθαρώτατον θεᾶσθαι καὶ τοῦ νοῦ τῶι πρώτωι. Ὅταν τοίνυν ὁ ἐπὶ τὴν θέαν τοῦ τοιούτου ἐσταλμένος ἢ μέγεθος ἢ σχῆμα ἢ ὄγκον περὶ ταύτην τὴν φύσιν φαντασθῆι, οὐ νοῦς τούτωι ἡγεμὼν γίνεται τῆς θέας, ὅτι μὴ νοῦς τὰ τοιαῦτα πέφυκεν ὁρᾶν, ἀλλ᾽ ἔστιν αἰσθήσεως καὶ δόξης ἑπομένης αἰσθήσει ἡ ἐνέργεια. Ἀλλὰ δεῖ λαβεῖν παρὰ τοῦ νοῦ τὴν ἐπαγγελίαν ὧν δύναται. Δύναται δὲ ὁρᾶν ὁ νοῦς ἢ τὰ πρὸ αὐτοῦ ἢ τὰ αὐτοῦ [ἢ τὰ παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ]. Καθαρὰ δὲ καὶ τὰ ἐν αὐτῶι, ἔτι δὲ καθαρώτερα καὶ ἁπλούστερα τὰ πρὸ αὐτοῦ, μᾶλλον δὲ τὸ πρὸ αὐτοῦ. Οὐδὲ νοῦς τοίνυν, ἀλλὰ πρὸ νοῦ· τὶ γὰρ τῶν ὄντων ἐστὶν ὁ νοῦς· ἐκεῖνο δὲ οὔ τι, ἀλλὰ πρὸ ἑκάστου, οὐδὲ ὄν· καὶ γὰρ τὸ ὂν οἷον μορφὴν τὴν τοῦ ὄντος ἔχει, ἄμορφον δὲ ἐκεῖνο καὶ μορφῆς νοητῆς. Γεννητικὴ γὰρ ἡ τοῦ ἑνὸς φύσις οὖσα τῶν πάντων οὐδέν ἐστιν αὐτῶν. Οὔτε οὖν τι οὔτε ποιὸν οὔτε ποσὸν οὔτε νοῦν οὔτε ψυχήν· οὐδὲ κινούμενον οὐδ᾽ αὖ ἑστώς, οὐκ ἐν τόπωι, οὐκ ἐν χρόνωι, ἀλλ᾽ αὐτὸ καθ᾽ αὑτὸ μονοειδές, μᾶλλον δὲ ἀνείδεον πρὸ εἴδους ὂν παντός, πρὸ κινήσεως, πρὸ στάσεως· ταῦτα γὰρ περὶ τὸ ὄν, ἃ πολλὰ αὐτὸ ποιεῖ. Διὰ τί οὖν, εἰ μὴ κινούμενον, οὐχ ἑστώς; Ὅτι περὶ μὲν τὸ ὂν τούτων θάτερον ἢ ἀμφότερα ἀνάγκη, τό τε ἑστὼς στάσει ἑστὼς καὶ οὐ ταὐτὸν τῆι στάσει· ὥστε συμβήσεται αὐτῶι καὶ οὐκέτι ἁπλοῦν μενεῖ. Ἐπεὶ καὶ τὸ αἴτιον λέγειν οὐ κατηγορεῖν ἐστι συμβεβηκός τι αὐτῶι, ἀλλ᾽ ἡμῖν, ὅτι ἔχομέν τι παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἐκείνου ὄντος ἐν αὐτῶι· δεῖ δὲ μηδὲ τὸ ἐκείνου μηδὲ ὄντως λέγειν ἀκριβῶς λέγοντα, ἀλλ᾽ ἡμᾶς οἷον ἔξωθεν περιθέοντας τὰ αὑτῶν ἑρμηνεύειν ἐθέλειν πάθη ὁτὲ μὲν ἐγγύς, ὁτὲ δὲ ἀποπίπτοντας ταῖς περὶ αὐτὸ ἀπορίαις.
