T bow down at the Feet of my Gracious Father Marpa! 

'“ Within the Temple of the Bodhi Hill, my body, 
Within my breast, wherein the Altar is, 
Within the chamber topmost and triangular within my heart, 
The Horse of Mind, moving like the wind, doth prance 
about.! 

'* What Lasso must be used to catch this Horse? 
And to what Post must It be tied when caught ? 
What Food is to be given It when hungry ? 

1 It is here assumed that the heart is the centre whence originate all mental 
impulses, which, when uncontrolled, are as unruly as a wild horse. The catch- 
ing and tying up of the Horse are the first steps in the science of mind-control 
called Yoga. Once the mind processes are dominated, the bridled and saddled 
Horse carries its spiritually accoutred rider, the Youth of Intellect, to Buddha- 
hood, 


What Drink is to be given It when thirsty ? 
In what Enclosure is It kept when cold? 

'“ To catch the Horse, use, as the Lasso, Singleness of Pur- 
pose ;? 
It must be tied, when caught, to the Post of Meditation ; 
It must be fed, when hungry, with the Guru's Teachings ; 
It must be given to drink, when thirsty, of the Stream of 
Consciousness ; 
- It must be kept, when cold, in the Enclosure of the Voidness. 
For Saddle, use the Will, for Bridle, Intellect ; 
Attach to It, as Girths and Cruppers, Fixedness Immovable ; 
Around it pass, as Head-stall and as Nose-band, the Vital- 
Airs. 

'“Its rider is the Youth of Intellect [Keen Watchfulness] : 
The Helmet, which he weareth, is Mahayanic Altruism ; 
His Coat of Mail is Learning, Thought, and Contemplation ; 
Upon his back he carrieth the Shield of Patience ; 

He holdeth, in his hand, the long Spear of Aspiration ; 

And, by his side, hangeth the Sword, Intelligence ; 

The smoothed Reed of Universal Mind [or Cause], 

Made straight by lack of wrath or hatred,? 

Barbed with the Feathers of the Four Unlimited [Virtues], 

Tipped with the Arrow-head of Intellect made keen, 

Then placed within the pliant Bow of Wisdom Spiritual, 

And fixed there, in the Aperture of the Wise Path and 
_ Right Method, 

He draweth out to the full fathom of Communion Wide; 

And shot forth thus, the arrows fall midst all the Nations. 

They strike the Faithful Ones, 

And slay the Sprite of Selfishness.* 

1 These verses describe progressive stages in yoga practice, beginning with 
Ekagraté, ‘Singleness of Purpose’, or One-Pointedness of Mind, and leading 
to Dhyana and Samadhi. 

3 Here the figure used is of an arrow-shaft of bamboo, which is commonly 
straightened and made even by heat, scraping, and polishing. 

8 Herein, Milarepa justifies the life of ascetical seclusion from the world. 
Unknown to the worldly multitude, who regard the yogt as a useless member 
of society, he is, in fact, the most useful ; owing to his thought-force, broadcast 
like silent and invisible arrows which fall among all nations, virtue and goodness 


Thus are the Enemies, all Evil Passions, overcome ; 
And protected are our Kindred.! 

'This Horse doth course along the widespread Plain of 
Happiness ; 
Its Goal is the attainment of the State of all the Conquerors.” 
Its Hind-part leaveth, in its rear, attachment to sangsdric 
life ; 
Its Front-part goeth on to the safe place of Deliverance. 

' By running such a race, I’m carried on to Buddhahood ; 
Judge if this be like your own conception of felicity: 
Worldly Happiness I covet not
