Q Kind and Gracious Father, compassionate to all, 
O Marpa the Translator, I bow down at Thy Feet! 
Be Thou a Kindred unto me, who am bereft of kindred ! 

'OQ aunt, recallest thou all that thou hast done? 
If thou can not, this song of mine will refresh thy memory ; 
Attentively give ear to it, and in repentance be sincere. 

'“« There in the wretched land of Kyanga-Tsa, 

Our noble father dying, left us, the three, a widowed mother 
and two orphans ; 

Of all our wealth thou didst defraud us, and brought us unto 
misery. 

And, as peas are by a staff, we were scattered then, 

By thee, O aunt, and by our uncle, too. 

So our attachment unto kith and kin was sundered. 

'“ Thereafter, when in distant lands I wandered long, 
Anxious to behold my sister and my mother, I returnéd 
home, 
And found my mother dead, and my sister gone. 


With anguish pierced, I sought religion, and finding it my 
sole solace, 

The life religious thenceforth chose. 

Compelled by lack of food to seek for alms, 

Before thy door, O aunt, I came to beg, 

And thou, in recognizing me, the helpless devotee, 

Didst burst forth in a storm of spiteful anger. 

With cries of ‘Cho! Cho!’ thou didst set thy dogs upon me; 

With thy tent-pole thou didst belabour me most heavily, 

As though I were a sheaf of corn for threshing. 

I fell face downward in a pool of water, 

Wherein I almost lost my precious life. 

Amidst thy fury, thou didst cal] me ‘ Trafficker in Lives’; 

And likewise, too, ‘Disgrace unto my Clan’. 

With these rude words my heart was wounded ; 

And, with despair and misery overwhelmed, 

My breath was stopped and I was speechless. 

And then, although I had no need of them, 

Thou didst, by various wiles, defraud me of my house and 
field. 

A demoness thou art, in the body of an aunt, 

That sundered me from all my love for thee, O aunt. 

'« Thereafter, when I reached mine uncle’s door, 
Malicious thoughts, injurious acts, vile words I met. 
'The destroying demon of the country cometh,’ was his cry ; 
He called the neighbours forth to help in killing me; 
And, words abusive uttering, 
He pelted me with showers of stones, 
And sought to transfix me with a rain of small keen arrows; 
With a malady incurable he filled my heart. 
There, too, I almost lost my life. 
O butcher’s heart in an uncle’s form! 
All my respect for an uncle I lost then. 

'When I was poor and helpless, my kinsfolk were more cruel 
to me than enemies, 
Thereafter, to the hill, where I was meditating, 
My constant Zesay came to see me, out of love; 


And she, with pleasant words, consoled me; 

She comforted my sorrow-stricken heart ; 

She brought me nourishing and tasty food ; 

And from starvation saved me then. 

Kind, indeed, is she, more kind than I can say; 

Yet since e’en she is not devoted to religion, 

Little need I see to meet her when she cometh ; 

And as for thee, mine aunt, far less I need to meet thee. 
Return e’en now, in the manner thou hast come ; 

'Tis better to go early, while there is still the time
