Q Lord, my Guru, by Thy Grace do I the life ascetic live ; 
My weal and woe are known to Thee! 

'“ Thewhole Sangsara, being e’er entangled intheWebof Karma, 
Whoever holdeth fast to it severeth Salvation’s Vital Cord. 

'“ In harvesting of evil deeds the human race is busy ; 
And the doing so is to taste the pangs of Hell. 

'“ The affectionate expressions of one’s kith and kin are the 
Devil’s Castle ;? 
To build it is to fall into the Flames [of Anguish]. 

1 That is, exclusive attachment to one’s own family is selfish, the true and 
only family being Humanity, and for this family alone should the Bodhisattva 
labour. Cf. Matthew x. 36-7: ‘And a man’s foes shall be they of his own 
household. He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of 
me; and he that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me.’ 


'« The piling up of wealth is the piling up of others’ property ; 
What one thus storeth formeth but provisions for one’s enemies. 

' Enjoying wine and tea in merriment is drinking juice of 
aconite ; 
To drink it is to drown Salvation's Vital-Cord.! 

'“The price mine aunt brought for my field is things wrung 
out of avarice ; 
To eat them would entail a birth amongst the famished ghosts.’ 

'The counsel of mine aunt is born of wrath and vengeance ; 
To utter it entaileth general disturbance and destruction. 

'“ Whatever I possess, both field and house, 
Take all, O aunt, and therewith happy be. 

' T wash off human scandal by devotion true ; 
And by my zeal I satisfy the Deities. 

'* By compassion I subdue the demons ; 
All blame I scatter to the wind, 
And upward turn my face. 

1 In the Buddhist view, all stimulants—alcoholic drinks, narcotic drugs, 
tobacco, and even the narcotic effects of strong tea and coffee—are not only 
demonstrably deleterious to the physical organism, but in exciting the nerves 
and the mind they give such control over the body to the lower or animal 
nature as to inhibit all influx of the elevating spiritual influences of the higher 
nature. Furthermore, sorrow, pain, and despair are to be regarded as potent 
means to awaken the human race to the fact that all sangsdric existence is, in 
the last analysis, inseparable from suffering, and therefore undesirable. Thus, 
if stimulants are used to drown all unhappiness and an artificial and deceptive 
feeling that everything is well with the world be engendered thereby, the 
opportunity of reaching the purely spiritual state of Supramundaneness, beyond 
the realm of sorrow, wherein there is the only true bliss, is lost—the Vital 
Cord of Deliverance, the golden link between the higher and the lower, is 
sundered, the sacred way to Olympus is closed, and human beings are left in 
the darkness of their unbelief, slaves to the animal within them. 

Although Christianity does not, most unfortunately, prohibit the use of all 
such stimulants, as do Buddhism, the Higher Hinduism, and the whole of 
Islam, the old Jewish prophet Isaiah has approached the right view in these 
words: ‘The priest and the prophet have erred through strong drink, they are 
swallowed up of wine, they are gone astray through strong drink; they err in 
vision, they stumble in judgement’ (Jsatak xxviii. 7). Cf., too, Paul’s Epsstle to 
the Ephesians (v. 18): ‘And be not drunken with wine, wherein is riot, but be 
filled with the Spirit.’ 

2 That is, in the world of famished (or unhappy) ghosts (Skt. Preta-Loka). 


$C) Gracious One, Thou the Immutable, 
Vouchsafe Thy Grace, that I may pass my life in solitude 
successfully
