Obeisance to my Lords, the Gurus! 
Grant that this Yogt may hold fast to solitude. 

'“QO sister, thou art filled with worldly sentiments and feel- 
Ings ; 
[Know thou that worldly] joys and griefs are all imper- 
manent. 
But I, alone by taking on myself these hardships, 
Am sure to win Eternal Happiness ; 
So harken thou unto thy brother’s song : 

'“To repay the kindness of all sentient beings, 
They having been our parents,! to the life religious I did 
give myself. 

1 So interininabl y, during inconceivable aeons, have evolution and transition, 

2004. MEDITATION IN SOLITUDE [PART II 

'“ Behold my lodgings; like those of jungle beasts are they ; 
Any other person would be timid in them. 

'“ Behold my food ; ’tis like the food of dogs and pigs ; 
It would excite in others nausea. 

'“ Behold my body; ’tis like a skeleton ; 
Even an enemy would weep on seeing it. 

*«“Tn my behaviour, I am like a madman ; 
O sister, thou art moved thereby to disappointment and to 
SOITOW ; 
Yet if thou could observe my mind, ’tis the Bodh: Mind 
itself ; 
The Conquerors rejoice at seeing it. 

'« Sitting upon this cold rock underneath me, I meditate with 
zeal, 
Enough to bear the tearing of my skin off or my flesh from 
off its bones ; 
My body, both inside and out, like nettles hath become ; 
A greenish hue, which changeth not, it hath assumed. 

'“ Here in this solitary rocky cave, 
Though with no chance of driving melancholy from my 
mind, 
Unchangedly I ever hold adoration and affection 
For the Guru, True-Embodiment of the Eternal Buddhas. 

'Thus persevering in my meditation, 
I doubtlessly shall gain Transcendent Knowledge and Ex- 
perience ; 

and rebirth, been going on, that all sentient beings have been our parents, The 
respect for woman among Buddhists is based on this principle, which is highly 
interesting in the light of modern biological sciences, 

The Hindus, likewise, say that each creature normally experiences 8,400,000 
sorts of birth ere attaining to the state of mankind. As in The Tibetan Book of 
the Dead (p. 178), four kinds of birth are mentioned : birth by heat and moisture, 
as in the lowest forms of organic life; birth by egg; birth by womb; and super- 
normal birth, such as that when the consciousness-principle is transferred from 
the human to another realm of existence, either at death normally or by yogic 
practices super-normally at any time. 


And if, in this, I can succeed, 

Prosperity and happiness is won within this lifetime, as I go 
along ; 

And, in my next birth, Buddhahood I’ll win. 

'“ Therefore, my sister, Peta dear, 
To woeful sorrows give not way, 
But also give thyself to penances, for religion’s sake
