Let  a  man  meditate  on  the  syllable*  Om, 
called  the  udgltha;  for  the  udgttha  (a  portion  of  the 
SSma-veda)  is  sung,  beginning  with  Om. 

The  full  account,  however,  of  Om  is  this  : — 

2.  The  essence'  of  all  beings  is  the  earth,  the 
essence  of  the  earth  Is  water,  the  essence  of  water 

'  The  ^liandogya-upanisliad  begins  with  recommending  medi- 
tation on  the  syllable  Oui,  a  sacred  syllabic  that  had  to  be  pro- 
nounced at  the  beginning  of  each  "Veda  and  of  every  recitation  of 
Vedic  hymns.  As  connected  with  the  SSma-veda,  that  syllable  Om 
is  called  udg!iha-  Its  more  usual  name  is  prawava,  The  object 
of  the  Upanishad  is  to  e:(pkin  the  various  meanings  which  the 
syllable  Om  may  assume  in  the  mind  of  a  devotee,  some  of  them 
being  extremely  artificial  and  senseless,  till  at  last  the  highest 
meaning  of  Om  is  reached,  viz.  Brahman,  the  intelligent  cause  of 
the  universe. 

*  Akshara  means  both  syllable  and  the  imperishable,  i.e.  Brahman. 

*  Essence,  rasa,  is  explained  in  different  ways,  as  origin,  sup- 
port, end,  cause,  and  effect.  Rasa  means  originally  the  sap  of 
trees.  That  sap  may  tx  conceived  either  as  the  essence  extracted 
from  the  tree,  or  as  what  gives  vigour  and  life  to  a  tree.  In  the 
former  case  it  might  be  transferred  to  the  conception  of  effect,  in 
the  latter  to  that  of  cause.  In  otu-  sentence  it  has  sometimes  the 
one,  sometimes  the  other  meaning.  Earth  is  the  support  of  all 
beings,  water  pervades  the  earth,  pianis  arise  from  water,  man  lives 
by  plants,  speech  is  the  best  part  of  man,  the  Rig-veda  the  t*est 
part  of  speech,  the  SAma-veda  the  best  extract  from  the  Jiii, 
udgltha,  or  the  syllable  Om,  the  crown  of  the  Saraa-veda. 

a:  > 

jthAndogya-upanishad. 

the  plants,  the  essence  of  plants  man,  the  essence 
of  man  speech,  the  essence  of  speech  the  Rig-veda, 
the  essence  of  the  Rig-veda  the  S4ma-veda\  the 
essence  of  the  S4ma-veda  the  udgltha  (which  is 
Om). 

3.  That  udgitha  (Om)  is  the  best  of  all  essences, 
the  highest,  deserving  the  higliest  place  ^,  the 
eighth. 

4.  What  then  is  the  Rik?  What  is  the  SAman  ? 
What  is  the  udgltha  ?     This  is  the  question. 

5.  The  Rik  indeed  is  speech,  Siman  is  breath, 
the  udgltha  is  the  syllable  Om.  Now  speech  and 
breath,  or  Rik  and  Siman,  form  one  couple. 

6.  And  that  couple  is  joined  together  in  the 
syllable  Om.  When  two  people  come  together, 
they  fulfil  each  others  desire. 

7.  Thus  he  who  knowing  this,  meditates  on  the 
syllable  (Om),  the  udgltha,  becomes  indeed  a  ful- 
filler  of  desires. 

8.  That  syllable  is  a  syllable  of  permission,  for 
whenever  we  permit  anything,  we  say  Om,  yes. 
Now  permission  is  gratification.  He  who  knowing 
this  meditates  on  the  syllable  (Om),  the  udgltha, 
becomes  indeed  a  gratifier  of  desires. 

9.  By  that  syllable  does  the  threefold  know- 
ledge (the  sacrifice,  more  particularly  the  Soma- 
sacrifice,  as  founded  on  the  three  Vedas)  proceed. 
When  the  Adhvaryu  priest  gives  an  order,  he 
says  Om.  When  the  WoXri  priest  recites,  he  says 
Om.    When  the  Udgdtr^'  priest  sings,  he  says  Om, 

^— ■ —        —        ■  I  ■!  _       -       _ _,^.,^^..^ ^ 

^  Because  most  of  the  hjmns  of  the  S&ma-veda  are  taken  from 
tlie  Rig-veda. 

*  Padirdhya  is  here  derived  from  para,  highest,  and  ardha,  place. 

The  eighth  means  the  eighth  or  last  in  the  series  of  essences. 

I   PRAPArHAKA,  I  KHAi^DA,  lO. 

— all  for  the  glory  of  that  syllable.  The  threefold 
knowledge  (the  sacrifice)  proceeds  by  the  greatness 
of  that  syllable  (the  vital  breaths),  and  by  its  essence 
(the  oblations)  ^. 

lo.  Now  therefore  it  would  seem  to  follow,  that 
both  he  who  knows  this  (the  true  meaning  of  the 
syllable  Om),  and  he  who  does  not,  perform  the 
same  sacrifice  \  But  this  is  not  so,  for  knowledge 
and  ignorance  arc  different.  The  sacrifice  which 
a  man  performs  with  knowledge,  faith,  and  the 
Upanishad*  is  more  powerful.  This  is  the  full 
account  of  the  syllable
