they  bring  a  man  hither  whom  they 
have  taken  by  the  hand,  and  they  say :  *'  He  has 
taken  something,  he  has  committed  a  theft."  (When 

know,  return  again  to  a  new  f<3nn  of  exisrcnce.  It  is  important  to 
observe  OiftL  the  commentator  denies  that  he  wlio  knows,  passes  at 
his  death  through  the  artery  of  the  head  to  the  sun,  and  then  to  the 
Sat.  lie  holds  that  with  him  who  knows  there  is  no  further  cause 
for  delay,  and  that  as  soon  as  he  dies,  he  returns  to  the  Sat. 

^  The  next  question  i<? :  Why  does  he  who  knows,  on  obtaining 
the  Sat,  not  return,  while  he  who  docs  not  know,  though  obtaining 
the  Sat  in  death,  returns?  An  illustration  is  chosen  which  is 
intended  to  show  how  knowledge  produces  a  material  effect.  The 
belief  in  the  efficacy  of  ordeals  must  have  existed  at  the  time,  and 
appealing  to  that  belief,  the  teacher  says  that  the  man  who  knows 
himself  guilty,  is  really  burnt  by  the  heated  iron,  while  the  man 
who  knows  himself  innocent,  is  not.  In  the  same  manner  the  man 
who  knows  his  Self  to  be  the  true  Self,  on  approaching  after  death 
the  true  Self,  is  not  repelled  and  sent  back  into  a  new  existence, 
while  he  who  does  not  know,  is  sent  back  into  a  new  round  of 
births  and  deaths.  The  man  who  tells  a  falsehood  about  himself, 
loses  his  true  Self  and  is  burnt ;  the  man  who  has  a  false  concep- 
tion about  his  Self,  loses  likewise  his  true  Self,  and  not  knowing 
the  true  Self,  even  though  approaching  it  in  death,  he  has  to  sufifer 
till  he  acquires  some  day  the  true  knowledge. 

VII   PRAPArWAKA,    I    KHANDA,    2.  lOQ 

he  denies,  they  say),  **  Heat  the  hatchet  for  him." 
If  he  committed  the  theft,  then  he  makes  himself  to 
be  what  he  is  not  Then  the  false-minded,  having 
covered  his  true  Self  by  a  falsehood,  grasps  the 
heated  hatchet — ^he  is  burnt,  and  he  is  killed. 

2.  '  But  if  he  did  not  commit  the  theft,  then  he 
makes  himself  to  be  what  he  is.  Then  the  true- 
minded,  having  covered  his  true  Self  by  truth, 
grasps  the  heated  hatchet — he  is  not  burnt,  and  he 
is  delivered. 

'As  that  (truthful)  man  is  not  burnt,  thus  has  all 
that  exists  its  self  in  That.  It  is  the  True.  It  is 
the  Self,  and  thou,  O  ^Svetaketu,  art  it.'  He  under- 
stood what  he  said,  yea,  he  understood  it
