Praglpati  said :  *  The  Self  which  is  free  from  sin, 
free  from  old  age,  from  death  and  grief,  from  hunger 
and  thirst,  which  desires  nothing  but  what  it  ought 
to  desire,  and  imagines  nothing  but  what  it  ought  to 
imagine,  that  it  is  which  we  must  search  out,  that  it 
is  which  we  must  try  to  understand.  He  who  has 
searched  out  that  Self  and  understands  it,  obtains 
all  worlds  and  all  desires.' 

2.  The  Devas  (gods)  and  Asuras  (demons)  both 
heard  these  words,  and  said :  '  Well,  let  us  search 
for  that  Self  by  which,  if  one  has  searched  it  out, 
all  worlds  and  all  desires  are  obtained.' 

Thus  saying  Indra  went  from  the  Devas,  Viro>fcina 
from  the  Asuras,  and  both,  without  having  com- 
municated with  each  other,  approached  Prs^&pati, 

'  PrsLrna  Up.  II,  i. 

'  The  same  verse  occurs  in  the  Ka//^a  6,  i6;  and  is  frequently 
quoted  elsewhere,  for  instance,  Mait.  comm.  p.  164.  For  vishvahh, 
the  right  reading  would  seem  to  be  vishvak.  In  the  Mait.  Up.  VI, 
30,  the  TrishAibh  are  reduced  to  Anush/ubh  verses.  See  also 
Prama  Up.  Ill,  6-7 ;  Mund.  Up.  II,  a. 

'  Here  the  highest  problem  is  treated  again,  the  knowledge  of 
the  true  Self,  which  leads  beyond  the  world  of  Brahm&  (masc.),  and 
enables  the  individual  self  to  return  into  the  Highest  Self. 

holding  fuel  in  their  hands,  as  is  the  custom  for 
pupils  approaching  their  master. 

3.    They   dwelt   there    as    pupils   for    thirty-two 
years.      Then    Pra^pati  asked   diem  :    '  For  what 

purpose  have  you  both   dwelt  here?' 

They  replied :  '  A  saying  of  yours  is  being  re- 
peated, viz.  "  the  Self  which  is  free  from  sin,  free 
from  old  age,  from  death  and  grief,  from  hunger 
and  thirst,  which  desires  nothing  but  what  it  ought 
to  desire,  and  imagines  nothing  but  what  it  ought  to 
im'agine,  that  it  is  which  we  must  search  out,  that  it 
is  which  we  must  try  to  understand.  He  who  has 
searched  out  that  Self  and  understands  it,  obtains  all 
worlds  and  all  desires."  Now  we  both  have  dwelt 
here  because  we  wish  for  that  Self.' 

Pra;^ apati  said  to  them  :  '  The  person  that  is  seen 
in  the  eye',  that  is  the  Self.  This  is  what  I  have 
said.  This  is  the  immortal,  the  fearless,  this  is 
Brahman.' 

They  asked :  '  Sir,  he  who  is  perceived  in  the 
water,  and  he  who  is  perceived  in  a  mirror,  who 
is  he  ? ' 

He  replied:  'He  himself  indeed  is  seen  in  all 
these
