Maghavat,  this  body  is  mortal  and  always 
held  by  death.     It  is  the  abode  of  that  Self  which  is 

^  See  A'L  Up.  VIII,  6,  3. 

'  5ahkara  explains  this  as  meaning  the  real  Self,  not  anything 
different  from  the  Self. 

VIII   PRAPArHAKA,   12  KHAJVDA,  3.  I4I 

immortal  and  without  body  K  When  in  the  body  (by 
thinking  this  body  is  I  and  I  am  this  body)  the  Self 
is  held  by  pleasure  and  pain.  So  long  as  he  is  in 
the  body,  he  cannot  get  free  from  pleasure  and  pain. 
But  when  he  is  free  of  the  body  (when  he  knows 
himself  different  from  the  body),  then  neither  pleasure 
nor  pain  touches  him  *. 

2.  *The  wind  is  without  body,  the  cloud,  light- 
ning, and  thunder  are  without  body  (without  hands, 
feet,  &c.)  Now  as  these,  arising  from  this  heavenly 
ether  (space),  appear  in  their  own  form,  as  soon  as 
they  have  approached  the  highest  light, 

3.  '  Thus  does  that  serene  being,  arising  from  this 
body,  appear  in  its  own  form,  as  soon  as  it  has 
approached  the  highest  light  (the  knowledge  of 
Self^).  He  (in  that  state)  is  the  highest  person 
(uttama  p^irusha).  He  moves  about  there  laughing 
(or  eating),  playing,  and  rejoicing  (in  his  mind),  be  it 
with  women,  carriages,  or  relatives,  never  minding 
that  body  into  which  he  was  bom  *. 

*  According  to  some,  the  body  is  the  result  of  the  Self,  the 
elements  of  the  body,  fire,  water,  and  earth  springing  from  the 
Self,  and  the  Self  afterwards  entering  them. 

*  Ordinary,  worldly  pleasure.    Comm. 

'  The  simile  is  not  so  striking  as  most  of  those  old  similes  are. 
The  wind  is  compared  with  the  Self,  on  account  of  its  being  for  a 
time  lost  in  the  ether  (space),  as  the  Self  is  in  the  body,  and  then 
rising  again  out  of  the  ether  and  assuming  its  own  form  as  wind. 
The  chief  stress  is  laid  on  the  highest  light,  which  in  the  one  case 
is  the  sun  of  summer,  in  the  other  the  light  of  knowledge. 

*  These  are  pleasures  which  seem  hardly  compatible  with  the 
state  of  perfect  peace  which  the  Self  is  supposed  to  have  attained. 
The  passage  may  be  interpolated,  or  put  in  on  purpose  to  show 
that  the  Self  enjoys  such  pleasures  as  an  inward  spectator  only, 
without  identifying  himself  with  either  pleasure  or  pain.  He  sees 
them,  as  he  says  afterwards,  with  his  divine  eye.    The  Self  per- 


'Like  as  a  horse  attached  to  a  cart,  so  is  the 
spirit  *  (pr4»a,  pra^dtman)  attached  to  this  body. 

4.  '  Now  where  the  sight  has  entered  into  the 
void  (the  open  space,  the  black  pupil  of  the  eye), 
there  is  the  person  of  the  eye,  the  eye  itself  is  the 
instrument  of  seeing.  He  who  knows,  let  me  smell 
this,  he  is  the  Self,  the  nose  is  the  instrument  of 

\     smelling.     He  who  knows,  let  me  say  this,  he  is  the 
I     Self,  the  tongue  is  the  instrument  of  saying.     He 

who  knows,  let  me  hear  this,  he  is  the  Self,  the  ear 

is  the  instrument  of  hearing. 

5.  *  He  who  knows,  let  me  think  this,  he  is  the 
/     Self,  the  mind  is  his  divine  eye  K     He,  the  Self, 

seeing  these  pleasures  (which  to  others  are  hidden 
like  a  buried  treasure  of  gold)  through  his  divine 
eye,  i.  e.  the  mind,  rejoices. 

'  The  Devas  who  are  in  the  world  of  Brahman 
meditate  on  that  Self  (as  taught  by  Prajfdpati  to 
Indra,  and  by  Indra  to  the  Devas).  Therefore  all 
worlds  belong  to  them,  and  all  desires.  He  who 
knows  that  Self  and  understands  it,  obtains  all 
worlds  and  all  desires.'  Thus  said  Pra/4pati,  yea, 
thus  said  Pra^dpati
